doc: estimator quick start and high-level overview (#7981)
near/nearcore: docs/architecture/gas/estimator.md

metric used is wall-clock time.

Once you have your estimation code all ready, it is better to run with large state and an optimized binary.

```bash
cargo run --release -p runtime-params-estimator --features required -- \
    --accounts-num 20000 --additional-accounts-num 2000000 \
    --iters 3 --warmup-iters 1 --metric time \
    --costs=ActionReceiptCreation,ActionTransfer,ActionCreateAccount,ActionFunctionCallBase
```

You might also want to run a hardware-agnostic estimation using the following
command. It uses `docker` and `qemu` under the hood, so it will be quite a bit
slower. It also won't work if `docker` is not installed on your system.

```bash
cargo run --release -p runtime-params-estimator --features required -- \
    --accounts-num 20000 --additional-accounts-num 2000000 \
    --iters 3 --warmup-iters 1 --metric icount --docker --full \
    --costs=ActionReceiptCreation,ActionTransfer,ActionCreateAccount,ActionFunctionCallBase
```

Note how the output looks a bit different now. The `i`, `r` and `w` values show
instruction count, read IO bytes and write IO bytes. The IO byte count is known
to be inaccurate.

```

> + /host/nearcore/runtime/runtime-params-estimator/emu-cost/counter_plugin/qemu-x86_64 -plugin file=/host/nearcore/runtime/runtime-params-estimator/emu-cost/counter_plugin/libcounter.so -cpu Westmere-v1 /host/nearcore/target/release/runtime-params-estimator --home /.near --accounts-num 20000 --iters 3 --warmup-iters 1 --metric icount --costs=ActionReceiptCreation,ActionTransfer,ActionCreateAccount,ActionFunctionCallBase --skip-build-test-contract --additional-accounts-num 0 --in-memory-db

Reviewer: Long term future work: should we consider what set of machines we want to support and run regular CI testing on them.

Author: Not sure what you mean.

Since the comment is on the qemu command, do you mean to run it with different CPU targets in qemu? I don't think qemu is even trying to reflect performance differences between CPUs, so I am skeptical on how useful that would be.

Or do you mean to set up multiple "real" machines with different hardware? That has been discussed as long-term goal before. Right now we have continuous estimation (CE) that runs it on "a" machine. We already struggle to make that vaguely stable across runs. We would probably need single tenant nodes, disable frequency boosting, and eliminate all other sources of variance to make progress there.
If and when we have managed to do that for a single machine, I would really like to extend it to cover different hardware. But we haven't assigned priority since I finished the initial CE work.

Reviewer: Sorry, I now realise my original comment was not very clear.  I really meant OSes and not machines.  We should figure out which OSes protocol contributors are typically expected to use and make sure that the above commands work on them.  We could start with e.g. ubuntu and Mac.

Author: Ah, I see. This specific command runs inside docker, so I think it should be fine with any OS?
For everything else (not docker + qemu runs), I don't see how this is specific to the estimator.

But yeah I think the discussion to run proper CI on Mac has come up before and I think it makes sense to have that.

Reviewer: > Ah, I see. This specific command runs inside docker, so I think it should be fine with any OS?

Yeah, I suppose it will boil down to simply is docker supported on the set of OSes we want to support.

Author: On a side note, the long-term goal in my head is to 50% to remove the qemu and docker setup entirely, as it is a substantial maintenance burden. But it's quite a long way still before we could do that, because we don't have a good alternative estimation method that is stable enough.

The other 50% of me that think we want to keep it as a second line of defense capturing regression. And perhaps for performance debugging where exact counts can sometimes be useful.

ActionReceiptCreation         214_581_685_500 gas [  1716653.48i 0.00r 0.00w]     (computed in 6.11s) 
ActionTransfer                 21_528_212_916 gas [   172225.70i 0.00r 0.00w]     (computed in 4.71s) 
ActionCreateAccount            26_608_336_250 gas [   212866.69i 0.00r 0.00w]     (computed in 4.67s) 
ActionFunctionCallBase         12_193_364_898 gas [    97546.92i 0.00r 0.00w]     (computed in 2.39s) 

Finished in 17.92s, output saved to:

    /host/nearcore/costs-2022-11-01T16:27:36Z-e40863c9b.txt
```

The difference between the metrics will be discusses in the
section on [Estimation Metrics](#estimation-metrics).

This should get you going to run estimations on your local machine. Also check
`cargo run -p runtime-params-estimator --features required -- --help` for the
list of options available.

## From Estimations to Parameter Values

To calculate the final gas parameter values, there is more to be done than just
running a single command. After all, these parameters are part of the protocol

> specification. They cannot change easily. And setting them to a wrong value can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
specification. They cannot be changed easily. And setting them to a wrong value can
```

cause severe system instability.

Our current strategy is to run estimations
with two different metrics and do so on standardized cloud hardware. The output
is then sanity checked manually by several people. Based on that, the final gas
parameter value is determined. Usually it will be the higher output of the two
metrics rounded up. More details on the process will be added to this document
in due time.

## Code Structure
The estimator contains a binary and a library module. The
[main.rs](https://github.com/near/nearcore/blob/e40863c9ba61a0de140c869583b2113358605771/runtime/runtime-params-estimator/src/main.rs)
contains the CLI arguments parsing code and logic to fill the test database.

The interesting code lives in
[lib.rs](https://github.com/near/nearcore/blob/e40863c9ba61a0de140c869583b2113358605771/runtime/runtime-params-estimator/src/lib.rs)

> and its submodules. Go and read the comments on the top of that file for a
> high-level overview of how estimations work. More details on specific

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and its submodules. The comments on the top of that file provide a
high-level overview of how estimations work. More details on specific
```
